# Plots for comparing categorical outcome variables between conditions

`plot_pdiff` helps visualize comparisons of a categorical outcome
variable between conditions. It plots proportions of cases for each
level of grouping variable and emphasizes a 1-df comparison among
conditions, plotting the estimated difference and its confidence
interval with a difference axis. You can pass esci-estimate objects
generated by
[`estimate_pdiff_one()`](https://rcalinjageman.github.io/esci/reference/estimate_pdiff_one.md),
[`estimate_pdiff_two()`](https://rcalinjageman.github.io/esci/reference/estimate_pdiff_two.md),
[`estimate_pdiff_paired()`](https://rcalinjageman.github.io/esci/reference/estimate_pdiff_paired.md),
[`estimate_pdiff_ind_contrast()`](https://rcalinjageman.github.io/esci/reference/estimate_pdiff_ind_contrast.md)
This function returns a ggplot2 object.

## Usage

``` r
plot_pdiff(
  estimate,
  error_layout = c("halfeye", "eye", "gradient", "none"),
  error_scale = 0.3,
  error_normalize = c("groups", "all", "panels"),
  difference_axis_breaks = 5,
  difference_axis_space = 1,
  simple_contrast_labels = TRUE,
  ylim = c(NA, NA),
  ybreaks = 5,
  rope = c(NA, NA),
  ggtheme = NULL
)
```

## Arguments

- estimate:

  An esci-estimate object generated by an estimate_pdiff\_ function

- error_layout:

  Optional; one of 'halfeye', 'eye', 'gradient' or 'none' to determine
  how expected error distribution will be displayed for each estimated
  parameter. Defaults to 'halfeye'. Currently does not apply if 'median'
  is selected as effect size, in which case a simple error bar will be
  used

- error_scale:

  Optional numeric determining width of the expected error distribution.
  Defaults to 0.3

- error_normalize:

  Optional; one of 'groups', 'all', or 'panels' to determine how width
  of the expected error distributions will be normalized. Defaults to
  'groups'. See documentation in ggdist

- difference_axis_breaks:

  Optional numeric \> 1 of suggested number of breaks for the difference
  axis. Defaults to 5

- difference_axis_space:

  Optional numeric \> 0 to indicate spacing to the difference axis.
  Defaults to 1

- simple_contrast_labels:

  Optional logical to determine if contrasts are given simple labels
  ('Reference', 'Comparison', 'Difference') or more descriptive labels
  based on the contrast specified.

- ylim:

  Optional 2-item vector specifying y-axis limits. Defaults to c(NA NA);
  Use NA to specify auto-limit.

- ybreaks:

  Optional numeric \> 2 for suggested number of y-axis breaks; defaults
  to 5

- rope:

  Optional 2-item vector with item 2 \>= item 1. Use to specify a range
  of values to use to visualize a hypothesis test. If both values are
  the same, a point-null hypothesis test will be visualized. If item2 \>
  item1 an interval-null hypothesis test will be visualized. Defaults to
  c(NA, NA), which is to not visualize a hypothesis test

- ggtheme:

  Optional ggplot2 theme object to specify the visual style of the plot.
  Defaults to
  [`ggplot2::theme_classic()`](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/reference/ggtheme.html)

## Value

Returns a ggplot object

## Details

This function was developed primarily for student use within jamovi when
learning along with the text book Introduction to the New Statistics,
2nd edition (Cumming & Calin-Jageman, 2024).

Expect breaking changes as this function is improved for general use.
Work still do be done includes:

- Revise to avoid deprecated ggplot features

- Revise for consistent ability to control aesthetics and consistent
  layer names

## Examples

``` r
data("data_campus_involvement")

estimate_from_raw <- esci::estimate_pdiff_two(
  esci::data_campus_involvement,
  CommuterStatus,
  Gender
)

# To visualize the estimate
myplot_from_raw <- esci::plot_pdiff(estimate_from_raw)
#> Warning: Using size for a discrete variable is not advised.
#> Warning: Using alpha for a discrete variable is not advised.
#> Warning: Using size for a discrete variable is not advised.
#> Warning: Using alpha for a discrete variable is not advised.

# To conduct a hypothesis test
res_htest_from_raw <- esci::test_pdiff(estimate_from_raw)


# From summary_data
estimate_from_summary <- esci::estimate_pdiff_two(
  comparison_cases = 10,
  comparison_n = 20,
  reference_cases = 78,
  reference_n = 252,
  grouping_variable_levels = c("Original", "Replication"),
  conf_level = 0.95
)

# To visualize the estimate
myplot_from_summary <- esci::plot_pdiff(estimate_from_summary)
#> Warning: Using size for a discrete variable is not advised.
#> Warning: Using alpha for a discrete variable is not advised.
#> Warning: Using size for a discrete variable is not advised.
#> Warning: Using alpha for a discrete variable is not advised.

#' # To conduct a hypothesis test
res_htest_from_summary <- esci::test_pdiff(estimate_from_summary)

```
