# Plots for comparing continuous outcome variables between conditions

`plot_mdiff` helps visualize comparisons of a continuous outcome
variable between conditions. It can plot raw data (if available) for
each condition, the mean or median (raw data only) for each condition,
and it emphasizes a 1-df comparison among conditions, plotting the
estimated difference and its confidence interval with a difference axis.
You can pass esci-estimate objects generated by
[`estimate_mdiff_one()`](https://rcalinjageman.github.io/esci/reference/estimate_mdiff_one.md),
[`estimate_mdiff_two()`](https://rcalinjageman.github.io/esci/reference/estimate_mdiff_two.md),
[`estimate_mdiff_paired()`](https://rcalinjageman.github.io/esci/reference/estimate_mdiff_paired.md),
[`estimate_mdiff_ind_contrast()`](https://rcalinjageman.github.io/esci/reference/estimate_mdiff_ind_contrast.md),
[`estimate_mdiff_2x2_between()`](https://rcalinjageman.github.io/esci/reference/estimate_mdiff_2x2_between.md),
and
[`estimate_mdiff_2x2_mixed()`](https://rcalinjageman.github.io/esci/reference/estimate_mdiff_2x2_mixed.md).
This function returns a ggplot2 object.

## Usage

``` r
plot_mdiff(
  estimate,
  effect_size = c("mean", "median"),
  data_layout = c("random", "swarm", "none"),
  data_spread = 0.15,
  error_layout = c("halfeye", "eye", "gradient", "none"),
  error_scale = 0.3,
  error_nudge = 0.4,
  error_normalize = c("groups", "all", "panels"),
  difference_axis_units = c("raw", "sd"),
  difference_axis_breaks = 5,
  difference_axis_space = 1,
  simple_contrast_labels = TRUE,
  ylim = c(NA, NA),
  ybreaks = 5,
  rope = c(NA, NA),
  rope_units = c("raw", "sd"),
  ggtheme = NULL
)
```

## Arguments

- estimate:

  An esci-estimate object generated by an estimate_mdiff\_ function

- effect_size:

  Optional; one of 'mean' or 'median' to determine the measure of
  central tendency plotted. Note that median is only available if the
  estimate was generated from raw data. Defaults to 'mean'

- data_layout:

  Optional; one of 'random', 'swarm', or 'none' to determine how raw
  data (if available) will be displayed. Defaults to 'random'

- data_spread:

  Optional numeric determining width raw data will use in each
  condition. Defaults to 0.15 (relative to 1 unit per condition)

- error_layout:

  Optional; one of 'halfeye', 'eye', 'gradient' or 'none' to determine
  how expected error distribution will be displayed for each estimated
  parameter. Defaults to 'halfeye'. Currently does not apply if 'median'
  is selected as effect size, in which case a simple error bar will be
  used

- error_scale:

  Optional numeric determining width of the expected error distribution.
  Defaults to 0.3

- error_nudge:

  Optional numeric determining degree to which measures of central
  tendency will be shifted to the right of the raw data; defaults to 0.4

- error_normalize:

  Optional; one of 'groups', 'all', or 'panels' to determine how width
  of the expected error distributions will be normalized. Defaults to
  'groups'. See documentation in ggdist

- difference_axis_units:

  Optional; one of 'raw' or 'sd' to determine if markings on the
  difference axis will be in raw-score units or in standard-deviation
  units. For 'sd' the standard deviation of the mean difference is used,
  and this is true even if 'median' is selected as the effect size

- difference_axis_breaks:

  Optional numeric \> 1 of suggested number of breaks for the difference
  axis. Defaults to 5

- difference_axis_space:

  Optional numeric \> 0 to indicate spacing to the difference axis.
  Defaults to 1

- simple_contrast_labels:

  Optional logical to determine if contrasts are given simple labels
  ('Reference', 'Comparison', 'Difference') or more descriptive labels
  based on the contrast specified.

- ylim:

  Optional 2-item vector specifying y-axis limits. Defaults to c(NA NA);
  Use NA to specify auto-limit.

- ybreaks:

  Optional numeric \> 2 for suggested number of y-axis breaks; defaults
  to 5

- rope:

  Optional 2-item vector with item 2 \>= item 1. Use to specify a range
  of values to use to visualize a hypothesis test. If both values are
  the same, a point-null hypothesis test will be visualized. If item2 \>
  item1 an interval-null hypothesis test will be visualized. Defaults to
  c(NA, NA), which is to not visualize a hypothesis test

- rope_units:

  Optional; one of 'raw' or 'sd' to indicate units of the rope passed.
  Defaults to 'raw'

- ggtheme:

  Optional ggplot2 theme object to specify the visual style of the plot.
  Defaults to
  [`ggplot2::theme_classic()`](https://ggplot2.tidyverse.org/reference/ggtheme.html)

## Value

Returns a ggplot object

## Details

This function was developed primarily for student use within jamovi when
learning along with the text book Introduction to the New Statistics,
2nd edition (Cumming & Calin-Jageman, 2024).

Expect breaking changes as this function is improved for general use.
Work still do be done includes:

- Revise to avoid deprecated ggplot features

- Revise for consistent ability to control aesthetics and consistent
  layer names

## Examples

``` r
# From raw data
data("data_penlaptop1")

estimate_from_raw <- esci::estimate_mdiff_two(
  data = data_penlaptop1,
  outcome_variable = transcription,
  grouping_variable = condition,
  switch_comparison_order = TRUE,
  assume_equal_variance = TRUE
)

# To visualize the estimated median difference (raw data only)
myplot_from_raw <- esci::plot_mdiff(
  estimate_from_raw,
  effect_size = "median"
)
#> Warning: Using size for a discrete variable is not advised.
#> Warning: Using alpha for a discrete variable is not advised.
#> Warning: Using size for a discrete variable is not advised.
#> Warning: Using alpha for a discrete variable is not advised.

# To conduct a hypothesis test
res_htest_from_raw <- esci::test_mdiff(
  estimate_from_raw,
  effect_size = "median",
  rope = c(-2, 2)
)


# From summary data
estimate_from_summary <- esci::estimate_mdiff_two(
  comparison_mean = 12.09,
  comparison_sd = 5.52,
  comparison_n = 103,
  reference_mean = 6.88,
  reference_sd = 4.22,
  reference_n = 48,
  grouping_variable_levels = c("Ref-Laptop", "Comp-Pen"),
  outcome_variable_name = "% Transcription",
  grouping_variable_name = "Note-taking type",
  assume_equal_variance = TRUE
)

# To visualize the estimated mean difference
myplot <- esci::plot_mdiff(
  estimate_from_summary,
  effect_size = "mean"
)
#> Warning: Using size for a discrete variable is not advised.
#> Warning: Using size for a discrete variable is not advised.

# To conduct a hypothesis test
res_htest_from_summary <- esci::test_mdiff(
  estimate_from_summary,
  effect_size = "mean",
  rope = c(-2, 2)
)
```
